doc/meta: Mention --version as a good usecase for installCheckPhase (#315616)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/stdenv/meta.chapter.md

$ nix-build -A your-package.tests
```

> Note that Hydra and [`nixpkgs-review`](https://github.com/Mic92/nixpkgs-review) don't build these derivations by default, but they are useful pointers for Nixpkgs' CI ([`@ofborg`](https://github.com/NixOS/ofborg)) that may help identify issues when changes such as version bumps are directly made to the package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that Hydra and [`nixpkgs-review`](https://github.com/Mic92/nixpkgs-review) don't build these derivations by default, and that ([`@ofborg`](https://github.com/NixOS/ofborg)) only builds them when evaluating PRs for that particular package (or when manually instructed).
```

#### Package tests {#var-meta-tests-packages}

Tests that are part of the source package are often executed in the `installCheckPhase`. This phase is also suitable for performing a `--version` test for packages that support such flag. Here's an example:

```nix
# Say the package is git

> stdenv.mkDerivation(finalAttrs: {

Reviewer: this style seems less common than `mkDerivation rec {`, is there a reason we'd want to show `finalAttrs` here?

Author: > this style seems less common than `mkDerivation rec {`, is there a reason we'd want to show `finalAttrs` here?

using `finalAttrs` is the modern way to `mkDerivation` nowadays, as it makes overriding the package much easier when the package references it self, and especially if you want to make it easy for the user reading this to maybe add a `passthru.tests.comprehensive` that will use `finalAttrs.finalPackage` which is not possible with the old `mkDerivation rec {` pattern.

Reviewer: > using `finalAttrs` is the modern way to `mkDerivation` nowadays

Do you have a reference for that? https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/unstable/#sec-using-stdenv is still showing `rec`

> it makes overriding the package much easier when the package references it self, and especially if you want to make it easy for the user reading this to maybe add a `passthru.tests.comprehensive` that will use `finalAttrs.finalPackage` which is not possible with the old `mkDerivation rec {` pattern

TIL, very cool

Reviewer: Some more ongoing discussion on this in #315337

  pname = "git";
  version = "...";
  # ...

>   installCheckPhase = ''

Reviewer: also add `doInstallCheck = true;` here as it is disabled by default

Author: > also add `doInstallCheck = true;` here as it is disabled by default

Thanks!

    runHook preInstallCheck

>     echo checking if git --version spits ${finalAttrs.version}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    echo checking if 'git --version' mentions ${finalAttrs.version}
```

    $out/bin/git --version | grep ${finalAttrs.version}

    runHook postInstallCheck
  '';
  # ...
})
```

Most programs distributed by Nixpkgs support such a `--version` flag, and it can help give confidence that the package at least got compiled properly. However, tests that are slightly non trivial will better fit into `passthru.tests`, because:

* `passthru.tests` tests the 'real' package, independently from the environment in which it was built
* We can run and debug a `passthru.tests` independently, after the package was built (useful if it takes a long time).

> * `installCheckPhase` adds an overhead to each build.

Author: > it looks like we have no general consistency on whether items in bulleted lists end with a '.', but at least let's keep it consistent within the list ;)

I agree :).

$ nix-build -A your-package.tests
```

Note that Hydra and [`nixpkgs-review`](https://github.com/Mic92/nixpkgs-review) don't build these derivations by default, and that ([`@ofborg`](https://github.com/NixOS/ofborg)) only builds them when evaluating PRs for that particular package (or when manually instructed).

#### Package tests {#var-meta-tests-packages}

Tests that are part of the source package are often executed in the `installCheckPhase`. This phase is also suitable for performing a `--version` test for packages that support such flag. Here's an example:

```nix
# Say the package is git
stdenv.mkDerivation(finalAttrs: {
  pname = "git";
  version = "...";
  # ...

  doInstallCheck = true;
  installCheckPhase = ''
    runHook preInstallCheck

    echo checking if 'git --version' mentions ${finalAttrs.version}

>     $out/bin/git --version | grep ${finalAttrs.version}

Reviewer 2: It'd be great if this could simply be a hook which would be configured using a similar interface as the tester.

>     $out/bin/git --version | grep ${finalAttrs.version}

Reviewer 3: This doesn't show the whole output on failure, nor is it separated from the build environment, therefore it is inferior to `testVersion`
